my job as I saw it as a journalist going
to Twitter was I simply want to expose
to the public what happened there can be
a broader conversation about where lines
should or shouldn't be drawn but my
that's not my job my job is sunlight let
me just explain to people what happened
they may not be aware a lot of the
people at Twitter really were trying
their best to do
um to do what they felt was right these
were not by and large people who were
you know seeking harm on others
um sometimes they went overboard
um for sure and I think there was there
seemed to be I can't prove it because
it's impossible to do a fully systematic
review of everything on Twitter but
there's certainly was to my mind and an
overly heavy hand on suppressing
important information and that heavy
hand always seemed to go in One
Direction you could say nothing was too
extreme as far as locking down that's
fine but if you have a prominent
scientist from Harvard who says you know
maybe we shouldn't require the vaccine
on kids that was you know unacceptable
foreign
[Applause]
[Music]
ER David swag about among other topics
his involvement in the Twitter files the
culture of silence and fear and
suppression around discussing covid-19
related stories and the detrimental
effects of lockdowns on a generation of
children
so David one of the things I really
wanted to talk to you today
um I think it'd be interesting to go
behind the scenes with regards to the
Twitter files I mean the Twitter
so-called Twitter files
um with Matt Tybee particularly leading
the charge in my understanding didn't
get a lot of Legacy media coverage
surprise surprise and that story was
downplayed but of course it it was a
viral
occurrence online particularly on
Twitter and rightly so as far as I was
concerned because
my sense was that it
indicated Illustrated demonstrated a
tremendous degree of behind the scenes
collusion between most were assembly
government officials and Twitter in
particular but media in general with
regards so-called to crafting The
Narrative around covid and I'm not very
impressed by government media collusion
efforts to craft narratives that's
certainly not the media's role that's
100 certain to craft narratives with the
government and I don't think that that's
Justified even in the face of a
so-called emergency in fact that might
be the time when it's most important for
the media to not collude with the
government so that we can be sure that
the response to the emergency isn't
worse than the bloody emergency or isn't
ill founded in some other grounds
because
it it often is it's not like we're
necessarily going to respond to an
emergency in the proper manner even if
we want to and critics need to abound in
emergency situations even more so than
under normal circumstances so you were
there will you walk us through how you
were there and what you saw let's start
with that and then we'll Branch out into
all the other tentacles we can attack
sure yeah so I was there basically
um at the request of Barry Weiss um who
I had known for a while and I'd written
for her um for her publication and I
knew that Barry had was one of the two
journalists who had access to the
Twitter files and just being friendly
and because I knew them I had emailed
Barry and um one of her editors saying
hey guys you know did
at least you're looking up covet stuff
this as they knew this was my sort of
area of expertise for the past number of
years if you want to look at coveted
stuff here's what you might want to look
at that and then uh basically an hour
later I get a response can you drop
everything and get on a plane to San
Francisco for us so I was not um
expecting that I was just trying to be
helpful but when they asked me to go out
there I was like of course there was no
there was no doubt as as a writer as
someone interested in this issue
um for years there was that was a
no-brainer so I went out to San
Francisco
um basically under Barry's
umbrella and
um there are a few other people a few
other journalists there while I was
there Michael schellenberger uh Layton
Woodhouse Lee Fung
um so the four of I while I was there
was the four of us
um and I was there for a few days and um
yeah it was it was quite remarkable just
to be at the center of this thing that I
had been observing
um I had no personal interaction with
Elon Musk um I saw him while I was there
but um I didn't communicate with him and
um I know a lot of people I think this
has been said a bunch of times but worth
saying again at least from I can only
speak to my personal experience but um I
believe this is the case for everyone I
had absolutely zero uh restraints at all
on anything that I was able to um to
report on or find you know whatever I
was able to find I could report on it
the only
um the only contingency was we had to
report first on Twitter it had to
whatever information that you're
publishing publish it on Twitter first
and then and you know a short while
later you can publish it on you know
whatever platform that was the the only
um restraint
um because there's been a lot of
speculation or people saying that you
know we were given certain material and
not given other material that was not
the case
um at all in my experience okay so let
me ask okay let me ask you about that
because obviously in some sense you were
given certain material not other
material because you're not going to get
access to absolutely everything Twitter
has so there's always there's an element
of pre-selection but your sense was that
that wasn't forced or manipulated what
did you have access to and then what did
you not have access to nor need access
to you know how did you and how did you
make the determination of of what
material was relevant and what form was
that material in and how well and how
much of it was there right these are all
good questions so um there were
basically two different channels of
information that we could access one was
was the sort of what I would call maybe
I guess the back end of Twitter where
there was an engineer in the room with
us on on a special laptop and we would
tell this person what
um specific accounts we wanted to look
up to see if there were any um special
Flags or marks on these accounts or on
specific tweets this person could look
that up and I was basically looking over
this person's shoulder as they were
performing these searches we had
absolutely no access to no visibility to
any personal information on people like
their private account information and
actually they were the people at Twitter
were very concerned about this so there
were I think there were a lot of lawyers
involved in other things to make sure
that the journalists had no ability to
view anything that was Private um or
personal in anyone's account what we
were able to view was the log files
within Twitter that showed if a specific
tweet or specific accounts had certain
flags on them
um so that was one thing that we could
look up the other thing was we could
have them perform searches for us in the
internal slack channels and in emails on
specific employees at Twitter and we
would send in a request this was not
performed in the room it was somewhere
off-site I think they could have been
next door for all I know where they
perform that and then sometime later
they would then bring back a different
person would come in a room with a
different special laptop where there
would be it could be thousands of emails
for a particular employee and then we
had a very limited window of time where
we had to search through it so one of
the things that I think people may not
be aware of is that you know I I had a
very limited amount of time to sift
through an extra ordinary amount of
information so it was very challenging
people why didn't you find this or that
well you know it's hard this was not
something where we could just go you
know digging into the files for weeks
and weeks on end I think Matt taibi and
some others had far more access they
were there much longer than I was and on
many trips but for me it was quite
limited so when I arrived I came there
with a list of people and things that I
already knew that I wanted to look for
basically for me as someone who's been
writing about thinking about and
researching matters related to covid
um you know since the very beginning of
the pandemic I had observed many things
that took place on Twitter during those
years and I basically wanted to kind of
reverse engineer well how did that
happen when I saw this tweet or that
tweet was labeled as misleading how did
that happen how so I went to Twitter
with a list of accounts and tweets that
I knew had that were flagged that I
observed and I wanted to I wanted to
deconstruct how did we get to that place
um and that's what I tried to do and uh
who were you who are you particularly
interested in I mean there were people
like Jay about Sherry who were
particularly nailed during the full you
know for spreading misinformation I mean
so you had a list a priority and I guess
that's also why Barry thought you would
be a good person to throw into the mix
so you contacted her now you said you
had been working in the background on
covid related materials so why don't you
tell everybody what made you the person
that Barry he decided to put in San
Francisco and then tell us who you were
particularly interested in tracking down
you know because you said you had a list
and so walk us through that like why you
and then who you who you were who you
were particularly interested in
investigating let's say so I've I've am
considered I think by a lot of people
I'm the first journalist in America to
write for a major publication
um very early I think it was the first
week of May
um to call for
um to question the idea that schools
should remain closed in America and that
kind of launched me on the path that
I've been on until today speaking with
you that was when when did you do that
this was I think the first week in May I
published this piece so in April I
started they have sorry may have went oh
I'm sorry 2020. so the very beginning of
2020. correct yeah
um I you know like anyone else there was
no such thing as a coveted beat I mean
prior to the pandemic but I observed
very early on that something seemed off
to me initially I was very nervous I I
we I wasn't Cavalier about what was
happening
um with the pandemic but by the middle
of April we started observing I live
right outside New York City
um we started observing that cases began
to drop precipitously and we also began
getting information from Europe that um
schools were beginning to open at the
end of April and they were projected to
open in the beginning of May in many
locations coupled with that there was a
lot of data coming out of China out of
Italy and elsewhere and it was unanimous
that children were at extraordinarily
low risk so all these factors coming
together and I'm like wait a minute why
is the school still closed I'm trying to
understand this particularly once they
were opening elsewhere and so I come
from a background as as a fact Checker
this is before fact checking became kind
of politicized the way it is now where
there are these special checking
websites but I worked for Conde Nast
magazines for a number of years and that
sort of training I think and also just
my own personal disposition I'm always
skeptical about things that's just for
blessing and a curse and I you kept
hearing about the experts are saying
this the experts are saying that and my
go-to because with when you fact check
an article
you always have to go to the source or
at least that's the ideal thing you
never just take someone's word for it
you know or you don't take just oh
something's printed in the New York
Times that's that's never sufficient or
at least that's particularly well I
don't want to pick on the times but but
any publication you want to go as close
as you can you're never done in a way so
even if someone says something first you
have to fact check well did that person
actually say it but then even if that's
true you don't want to say well is what
they are saying true and then you have
to go layers deeper so anyway that kind
of mindset has that's always been how I
view the world and I started observing
these things and something seemed off to
me and to my amazement
um no one seemed to be writing about
this at least not in any of the major
Publications that I typically read and I
couldn't understand what was going on
I've written for the Atlantic the New
York Times the New York Magazine a whole
a lot of I guess what are terms sort of
Legacy uh you know media outlets for for
many years so I had contacts at these
places I knew editors and I started
reaching out to people saying hey I I'm
why aren't you writing about this I I've
put together this compendium of research
I mean it was like a bullet list you
know a mile long of all the data about
children all the stuff and no one seemed
to be writing about this I couldn't
figure out what was going on
um I was turned down by every
publication just about
um except for one editor at wired who
said you know what everything you wrote
here you know in my pitch to him this
all checks out like I I try to make like
everyone I make mistakes I'm sure in
every article there's something wrong
but I try to be very meticulous and I
try to make my case almost like a lawyer
airtight and when I presented I think
you were turned down so so universally
apart from I mean look it's not that
it's it's the default to a suggestion
for an article is to be turned down
that's right start with the fact that
it's a high Baseline probability but you
seem to be indicating that in this
particular case the Baseline was a
little bit higher than normal even
though you had quite a compendium of
facts and it was a germane topic it's a
very good point you know an independent
writer that the default is to be turned
down
um however this was this was really
solid like the you know you have a sense
as a writer at least I do after a while
it's like oh I'm gonna I could sell this
like that I had a a month earlier a few
weeks earlier I had written a piece that
I think was the number one red piece in
the New York Times um it was about this
newlywed couple who were stranded in the
Maldives I have a good sense of when
something's real and when it can hit and
I was kind of astonished that I was like
I found this special thing I found a
lane for myself no one seems to be
writing about this all the stuff is true
this is my Lane like I'm definitely
gonna nail this because that's what you
know it's exciting sometimes about
journalism when you find this thing
that's important that's true that's
interesting and no one else is doing it
um and that's what happened and and so
we could talk about it later I could
speculate now about why I was turned
down but ultimately what happened was I
was able to write this piece for Wired
and that kind of set me on a path where
now I've been known as this quote
contrarian um which you know I don't
even know what that means these labels
I've just been following means
journalists right right to my mind
journalists is supposed to generally be
a very adversarial type of relationship
between me and the powers that be or me
and what's being said rather than
working simply as an amplifier or a
megaphone
um so when we were told all this
information these models that they were
putting out Imperial College and ihme
these places I'm like well none of these
models seem to be checking out they seem
to be wrong well what are the inputs in
these models how are they putting these
things together no one seems to be
asking these questions or at least not
what I was observing why are my kids and
50 million other children in America
um locked out of their school buildings
when kids are starting to go back in
Europe so all these were to me very
interesting and Incredibly important
questions that I didn't seem to be
getting adequate answers to anywhere
else so I said okay I'm gonna have to do
this myself it was a very strange
feeling because I was in the middle of
writing another book of which I'm still
in the process of writing at the time
but I found I was unable to concentrate
on on the book I mean I I eventually had
my agent contact
UM my editor and they were kind enough
to say okay he can you know put this
aside for all I mean this was a pandemic
the schools were closed I could not
concentrate so that set me on my path
and since and after that point I just
wrote a stream of Articles
um beginning and wired and then I
migrated to other places like the
Atlantic and New York Magazine where I
think most of what I was writing
challenged a lot of the sort of uh what
would we call it mainstream narrative
The Establishment narrative from both
the media as well as the public health
establishment in America about what was
real or what wasn't real and um so
everything from school closures has just
been which has been my focus
um but I looked into myocarditis I I
think I was the first person one of the
first people to interview
um the lead scientist in Israel who put
out the very first report I don't even
know how I did it but I got this guy on
the phone I said send me send me the
report I have to see this um um so I
wrote about that very early on
um and just all of these things there's
so many these areas that things seemed a
little bit off
um and and I want to say I don't want to
ascribe ill will to anyone I don't think
there's something in like a nefarious
um uh conspiratorial thing happening or
at least that's not how I approach it I
simply approach everything of what is
the the truth here what is this sort of
like empirical underlying data to
support whatever we are being told and I
just keep digging and digging and
digging to see if it seems true or not
and that ultimately so that that's the
sort of both long and short of how I got
to to Twitter ultimately as someone that
Barry thought I was a good person in
particular I thought you get
how did you get in how did you establish
a relationship with Barry had you known
her at the New York Times how did you
guys get know um I had written a piece
for Barry's
um website um for her publication
um I forget how how much earlier so we
knew each other through that I forget
how I got in touch with Barry initially
but also I wrote a piece I think it was
about
um it was about
um the vaccines and and children and and
how that the I'd interviewed a member of
the um committee who um one of the
advisory committees for for the CDC is
pretty remarkable
um interview so I I had written that
verse so I knew Barry and I knew some of
her editors from that experience and
again I was just trying to be helpful
and I you know reached out to them just
saying you know because I think at that
point Matt taibi had written and one or
several Twitter files and Barry had done
one or two but I don't think anyone had
really written about covid related
material I didn't know what the story
was with the Twitter files oh I was
saying saying hey I know you I've done a
lot of reporting on covet I have no all
these
um people who are scientists who had
their tweets um mislabeled and you know
labeled as misleading in some manner or
they were suspended from Twitter I had
all this information that the average
journalist just simply wouldn't have
just because I've been so deep in this
world I have a Rolodex you know a mile
long of infectious disease specialists
and others who I've been talking to for
years now so I just had all these people
in this information and I was just
trying to be helpful saying here are
some things that you might want to look
for in case you're sending someone there
you're going back and then they said
David just get on a plane and please do
it yourself
Elysium health is dedicated to tackling
the biggest challenge in health aging
and they make the benefits of Aging
research accessible to everyone Elysium
creates Innovative Health Products with
clinically proven ingredients that
enable customers to live healthy lives
Elysium works with leading institutions
like Oxford and Yale and they have
dozens of the world's best scientists
working with them eight of them are
Nobel Prize winners their Flagship
product basis focuses on NAD
supplementation which is a key component
in cellular aging they've sold over
three and a half million bottles of this
supplement alone
matter is a brain health supplement that
slows natural brain loss a recent survey
of doctors show that 92 percent of them
would recommend matter to combat brain
aging
Elysium also offers cutting-edge
solutions to help support your
metabolism and immune system if you're
not sure where to start consider their
amazing tool for measuring biological
aging called index not only will index
assess how quickly you've been aging
across nine different bodily systems but
it will also recommend simple changes to
your day-to-day life to change how
quickly you age
Elysium is giving Jordan Peterson
listeners 25 off your first purchase of
a monthly plan go to elysiumhealth.com
Jordan and enter code jbp25 at checkout
that's elysiumhealth.com Jordan enter
code jbp25 for 25 off your first monthly
plan today
so so you had established this Rolodex
and you'd been tracking scientists and
so when you went to San Francisco there
was a set of accounts that and tweets
that you were particularly interested in
investigating who were the who were some
of the people the Cardinal people on
that list and why did you focus on them
right so
um again I had observed over the prior
you know couple years a number of tweets
or or accounts having
um having their information their
content suppressed in some way and
content that I knew as a writer and
someone who had done lots of research on
this and spoken experts content that I
knew was perfectly legitimate there are
things that experts can or even should
disagree on that's different from saying
it's quote misinformation but
um so someone like Martin koldorf who um
who wrote The Great Barrington
declaration with with Jay bhattacharya
and Sir natural Gupta um I knew that
Martin had a particular tweet that I saw
that was flagged as misleading um he was
talking about saying I I you know I
don't remember the precise language but
it was children it it's not necessary to
require the vaccine of of children at
this point I don't see why that's you
know he was giving his opinion this guy
is one of the most renowned infectious
disease experts in the world perfectly
uh reasonable for him to give his view
on this matter and that was flagged as
misleading and I wanted to find out why
how did that happen there are some other
people
um Andrew bostum and some other
Physicians and others who had tweets I
know Andy had tweeted something about
there was a study that found I think
there is a low sperm count
um following one one or two of the doses
of the vaccine this was published in a
peer review journal now how what is the
quality of that study I have no idea but
the bar should be if something is
published in a legitimate peer-reviewed
medical journal and you're citing it in
a tweet that's reasonable in my mind to
not be uh suppressed in any manner um so
there were a handful of things like that
and I wanted to work backwards and
understand and basically I found there
were why do you think why do you think
this stood out for you you know you you
said you were you were occupied with a
book the time I mean you had other
things to do and but this issue of
particularly the suppression of this
information made itself obvious to you
as a problem do you do you have any
sense of what it was about what you were
doing that made that particularly
relevant to you and why you decided to
pursue it because you said it gripped
you in some way right it even dislodged
you out of your book right and then
ultimately and now I'm writing another
book on the closures of the American
school closures um during the pandemic
and I guess specifically with the
Twitter suppression that gripped me
perhaps that's sort of emblematic of the
broader
um topic that correct me which is the
information environment that we all live
within and trying to understand why some
ideas were considered okay and other
ideas were considered not okay and we
saw that play out in the sort of
mainstream media our Legacy press and
I'm someone who had written for a number
of these Publications that I guess would
be considered you know Prestige
Publications or left-wing or whatever
terminology people want to use
um and all of a sudden these places so I
I have no this is non-political for me I
had no specific political affiliation to
want one thing or another to be true or
to not be true
um and I think my prior experience is
writing for these places shows that like
I'm not coming from this from political
angle yet nevertheless I found myself
suddenly in this sort of outside this
this group that roughly I'd been within
professionally and personally
um for basically most of my adult life
and it was a source of endless
Fascination and consternation to me like
how is this possible why is this
happening why am I viewing this
differently from so many of my neighbors
and other people yet I know from
speaking to scientists around the world
I'm not crazy these I wasn't talking to
some you know lunatic in their basement
these are people at the most prestigious
uh institutions in the world and they
were in a group or also what I was
saying censored okay so let me that's
correct let me do that a little bit well
um the
let's give the devil is due
we have
before the pandemic a substantial amount
of public trust in vaccines and a
general consensus that vaccines were
miraculous in many ways and that they
were particularly useful for the
production of children and that we could
trust the public health authorities to
insist upon what was best for children
and that that's what they were doing and
that they were a good intermediary
between the pharmaceutical companies and
their financial interests and the health
of children and we trusted the public
health authorities so there's a lot of
good will towards the vaccine Enterprise
as such and so that would be the
Baseline and so people would assume and
rightly so that if we were being told by
public health authorities to vaccine
vaccinate children that they believed
that that was actually in the best
interest of the children and that that
was reliable and so you could imagine
there would be resistance to any counter
narrative that would question that
fundamental set of presumptions now
there were people who were beating the
anti-vaxx drum before the pandemic but
not very many and and uh and generally
ignored
the problem here it seems to me please
correct me if I'm wrong or if this
doesn't isn't in accord with what
happened to you the problem I had very
early on was that I didn't see there was
any evidence at all the children were
actually at risk for any particularly
serious consequences in relationship to
covid you could make a case perhaps that
they could get vaccinated like they
might get vaccinated for a flu but the
more morbidity mortality risk for
children was no higher than it was for
the flu so that big the first question
it begged was
well should children be getting
vaccinated at all and the second
question it certainly begged was well is
there any reason whatsoever to make such
vaccines mandatory for children
especially because that's so much in the
financial industry it's so egregiously
in the financial interest of
pharmaceutical companies to have that
enforced or at least in their short-term
interest
so
you know it's that terrible combination
of the trust that the public had in the
public health authorities and the
financial gain that was sitting there
ready for the Pharmaceuticals to
capitalize on I think that made this
such a toxic let's say a toxic brew and
and also why the narrative emerged that
you had to push back against that's how
it looked to me what do you think about
that as a set of hypotheses
right so I think that the way I think
about you know the vaccine policy in
particular for children
um to me that's all of a piece it
dovetails with with with the policy
regarding school closures and a variety
of other factors they're all part of the
same idea which is a very kind of myopic
focus on the suppression or attempted
suppression of the transmission of the
virus but we we were led to believe that
there was this conflation that
suppressing a virus is not
um the same thing as human flourishing
it it can be or societal flourishing and
it's reasonable in the very early stages
when no one knew or a few people knew
what was happening or at least there was
some degree of uncertainty and Chaos
that people want to be particularly
careful to to try to
um avoid transmission to try to figure
out what's happening and I was that way
myself personally but I think very early
on
um we needed to also acknowledge that
there would be profound harms and
damages from the mitigation efforts that
that were put into place setting aside
whether these mitigation efforts would
be successful that's a whole separate
issue but even if they were successful
what are what are the downsides of this
and very early I think those were both
not acknowledged and recognized by many
of the authorities number one and number
two the wildly disproportionate burden
that
um working-class people were going to
absorb from those measures
um was not acknowledged so so we had a
what we had so there's a biological
parallel here and a and a uh a set of
observations on cognitive
oversimplification that are relevant so
the biological parallel which I think is
a very good one
is that in a disease process there are
two risks there's the risk of the
disease
and then there's the risk of the
overreaction of the immune system
and so the immune system can overreact
and cause all sorts of diseases so
autoimmune diseases are like that
arthritis is like that and excess
information is like that and you can get
a Cascade of
immunological responses that are fatal
when the disease itself would be
unlikely to be fatal and so the threat
of immune overreaction is a real one now
there is a
set of
behaviors known as the extended immune
system the behavioral immune system
and that's the manifestation of the
biological defenses against infection
that manifest themselves behaviorally
and so a couple of those are well
discussed is one of those the emotion of
disgust the sense of contamination the
gag reflex the repulsion that we feel
for things that are disgusting
and that's the way the immune system in
some sense has reached up into the
higher Stratosphere of cognitive and
behavioral proclivity to protect us at
the macro scale against pathogens and
that's extremely important because
pathogen transmission is extremely
dangerous you you may know you likely
know that
when the Europeans came to the Western
Hemisphere
95 percent of the Native Americans died
within about 150 years of contact and
they died because they had no resistance
whatsoever to mumps measles and smallpox
and that resistance had been bred in
European cities where we were in close
quarters with animals and so pathogen
transmission is extremely
deadly obviously and we've evolved all
sorts of mechanisms now at a political
level
the behavioral immune system also
extends itself and it extended itself
and you might say in this situation into
the entire panoply of authoritarian
pandemic responses and that was
spearheaded by China and the danger
there is it's a parallel danger is that
the response will be more pathological
than the pathogen and the way it was
more pathological as far as I could tell
was that
we hyper focused on the potential danger
posed by the pathogen and we eliminated
all consideration whatsoever for the
potential side effects of all of the
amelioration strategies so the
politicians abdicated their
responsibility to so-called experts and
the public health experts who were
concerned with pathogen control had no
idea how to contemplate all the other
risks like the risks to the education of
children the risks to the working class
the risks to the bloody supply chain the
risks to fundamental Liberties like
politicians should have been calculating
the balance of risks there instead of
focusing maniacally and mono maniacally
on a single problem well and also
defaulting their damn responsibility to
so-called Public Health experts who
aren't politicians or economists who
don't have a broad purview and so we
stepped into
a social behavioral immune over response
and I think some of that was also driven
by the
Financial machinations of the
pharmaceutical companies themselves and
you know I mean they were trying to make
vaccines and hypothetically we needed
the vaccines but God it was so much in
their financial interest to push this
narrative and they're so effective at
lobbying I mean and there and all things
considered as the left once knew if you
had to rank order globalist companies in
terms of public corruption you'd have to
put the bloody pharmaceutical companies
near to the Top If if you use no other
measure then size of lawsuits in the
past they've been they've had the
biggest the most and the biggest
lawsuits for malfeasance levied against
them I think of any corporate entities
ever in the history of capitalism and so
well so that's the perfect storm well I
mean you made a bunch of very good
Salient points and you know I would say
that you know the react the overreaction
of the human immune system I think is a
decent metaphor
um for the overreaction of society of
what happened and the as we were saying
this focus on this one thing does not
take into account all these ancillary
things these sort of second order
effects that are going to happen and
while public health professionals
Anthony fauci on down may have an
expertise in a particular Lane they are
not experts on the world and one of the
things that I've always found so
irritating and ridiculous is um when
there's been certain epidemiologists or
others who say you know stay in your
lane to whether it's a journalist an
economy there's someone named Emily
Oster who's an economist out of brown
who did a lot of early research
um related to schools and other matters
and people just immediately dismissed
her she's an economist what does she
know and I'm thinking that that's who we
need to be looking at some of these
things you need economists we need
psychologists we need
um people who under Educators we need
people in a whole range of fields of
human endeavor to try to understand and
discuss what are going to be the the
first second and third order effects of
of all these interventions we are
imposing
um so and I met this New York Times
Reporter who's done some science
reporting at a party a while back and I
remember speaking with her about this
and she immediately dismissed just um
Emily Oster is well she's just an
economist and it gave me this window
into I mean I had already observed this
anyway you know just by reading um
reading the the media news outlets but
to speak to someone who's actually
reporting on this okay this confirmed
what we already could see that there is
this Viewpoint that unless you had a an
infectious disease physician or an
epidemiologist that your view was
somehow not relevant but this made no
sense someone who understands disease
spread does not have an expertise in
childhood you know nutrition necessarily
or in education or in Psychology or in
the economics because all of these
things of course are interconnected if
you have someone who's been running a
mom-and-pop business and then the
business gets closed they lose their
insurance they're depressed and lonely
they're barred from seeing their friends
all of these things well guess what that
also has an effect on someone's Health
obviously that's not as bad as dying
from a virus but not everyone was
necessarily at extreme risk of dying
from the virus and we certainly knew
this after a few months as time wore on
and to me you know one of the biggest
problems is that there was never any
sort of sunset clause on any of these
things there's one of the things we know
from implementation science is it's very
hard to de-implement so once the wheels
are in motion it is very hard you know
Physicians continue to prescribe an
antibiotic prophylactically even though
there's lots of studies that show you
know post-op it's not necessarily
beneficial in certain circumstances but
they'll continue to do it anyway because
just this force of habit you know and
then that on a much broader scale when
you have politicians involved then it's
not just a clinician but you know in a
like a doctor but you have a politician
who puts some sort of policy in place or
you have a school superintendent it is
very hard to unwind these things and
there was no mechanism in place early on
saying we need to have some sort of
review of what's Happening instead there
is a bunch of people basically making up
arbitrary benchmarks for for different
oil when it reaches five percent we can
do this when it reaches three percent
you can do that but even just a cursory
review of the literature on this show
that these were these were hardly
grounded in any sort of like scientific
uh uh reasoning a lot of these
benchmarks and besides to every city and
every school system was doing different
things anyway
we'll be right back first we wanted to
give you a sneak peek at Jordan's new
series Exodus
so the Hebrews created history as we
know it
you don't get away with anything and so
you might think you can bend the fabric
of reality and that you can treat people
instrumentally and that you can bow to
the Tyrant and violate your conscience
without cost you will pay the piper it's
going to call you out of that slavery
into Freedom even if that pulls you into
the desert
[Music]
that there's something else going on
here that is far more Cosmic and deeper
than what you can imagine the highest
ethical Spirit to which we're beholden
is presented precisely as that spirit
that allies itself with the cause of
Freedom against tyranny I want villains
to get punished but do you want the
villains to learn before they have to
pay the ultimate price that's such a
Christian question
when people are presented with too much
information or too many options let's
say you could even say too much
untrammeled so-called Freedom it's
really chaos they get anxious
because anxiety is a signal of pathway
complexity too many things to choose
between so there's a real drive to
desire a simple and uni-dimensional
solution and so if you don't want to be
bothered thinking
then if someone offers you a reduction
of the problem to a single Dimension and
then a virtuous pathway forward it's
extremely tempting psychologically to
seize that because then you can well you
could have said well I can ignore all
this coveted nonsense and go back to my
book for example and people can think
well the experts have it and I don't
have to think about it okay the problem
is as you've pointed out this could get
us into the conversation about the
church in California and the issue of
Liberties the problem is is that
that there isn't a irreducible amount of
complexity in the world and if you
oversimplify you pay a price somewhere
else somewhere invisible but somewhere
else and so then you might ask yourself
well what guarantees do we have against
that temptation to oversimplify you know
because we could say well every time
there's a new illness we'll just lock
everybody up
well
everyone who has any sense knows that
that's a bad idea the reason it's a bad
idea
is because locking everybody up violates
our fundamental Liberties our natural
rights let's say and then you might say
well why the hell do we have those
natural rights to begin with and the
answer is something like
societies have evolved and computed that
there's a certain set of inviolable
freedoms that actually constitute the
best solution to irreducible complexity
so the idea is something like this all
things considered and that would be all
even all the things you couldn't even
consider because you don't have enough
time all things considered it's better
to let people say what they need to say
right in terms of total balance of risks
there's no better solution and maybe
that's because of information
dissemination All Things Considered it's
better to leave people to assemble
freely right and to own their own
property and and and husband it
according to their dictates and the
reason for that is because even in
emergencies those are the best policies
and that's why those rights are supposed
to be invaluable and what we did instead
especially because we copied
totalitarian China so rapidly which is
extraordinarily interesting to me from a
psychological perspective is we set all
those intrinsic rights aside we said no
we're going to collapse this
multi-dimensional problem to one
dimension we're going to call virtue one
pathway forward which is don't transmit
the disease and everything else is going
to go by the wayside well we pay the
we're still paying the price for
violating those fundamental rights we've
destroyed public trust in in the public
health Enterprise we've compromised the
supply chain terribly God only knows how
many people we've killed
um there's a tremendous decrement in
vaccine uptake now around the world
because people are very skeptical about
vaccines and the problem ability that
will kill more kids
by not vaccinating them with vaccines
that actually work then we saved with
the covid vaccine which was unnecessary
for children is extremely high we're
paying the invisible price for violating
all of those rights now we talked a
little bit before we started our
conversation about a particular case in
California that you wanted to
concentrate on case of a church that has
just been levied and immensified by the
Civil Authorities that wanted to stay
open during covid and to probably use
that as an example of
this totalitarian tendency to undermine
natural rights in the service
hypothetical service of social cohesion
and safety and and you know dig in from
there so do you want to lay out that
case
sure yeah and and the church case is
interesting to me because it echoes
to my mind I had been writing about
schools and children for so long that
what I observed happened with this
church seemed very very familiar to me
instantly um that the same sort of
dynamic was in place and you know just
as a sort of like macro framing on this
when you're talking about whether it's a
vaccine or school closures in medicine
the default is to not intervene unless
you can prove you know the the saying
from the FDA is you know safe and
effective
um so the default in America is for
children to be in school and to be able
to go to school that's the default the
so in order to prevent them from going
to school that's the intervention is
preventing them that's not the default
but yet something flipped we're keeping
them barred from school became the
default but this is not how medicine
typically functions so that I think is
also broadly how we could think about
all sorts of other civil liberties I I I
should say I don't think there's a
scenario I don't think it's just never
appropriate for an authority or a public
health authority to infringe on some of
our liberties
um but but the bar to to reach that
should be quite high of course and there
should also be some sort of limits on
that so this stuff with with kids in
schools and whether you want to talk
about vaccines or even the information
environment on social media and
elsewhere all these things sort of
flipped what we philosophically and
ethically tend to think of as the
default that the default then became the
intervention but the default should
never be the intervention without strong
evidence that the intervention is going
to provide a net benefit rather than a
net harm well security well one of the
Hallmarks for that you know there's a
claim among scientists I think Carl
Sagan first said this at least
formalized it although it was known
implicitly is that extraordinarily
extraordinary times require
extraordinary evidence and right an
extraordinary claim is one that violates
a fundamental precept and the most
fundamental precepts in our culture are
embedded in the domain of natural rights
right they're self-evident even outside
the Constitutional framework there is
nothing more fundamental to the
functioning of our culture than that set
of natural rights and so if your
solution to a problem is what we have to
violate one or more natural rights then
it should be incumbent on you to
demonstrate that you have a body of
proof that is sufficient to justify
moving something that is fundamentally
immobile and certainly that standard of
proof wasn't met in this particular case
because we didn't even have good data on
well how what the actual mortality rate
was for the covid infection especially
when it was segregated by different age
age groups I mean it was obvious it was
early it's obvious pretty damn early on
that the death rate among children was
vanishingly small and so look I mean
yeah more more children die drowning
every year than they did from covid in
any individual year in America for
example um we don't bars we don't bar
swimming and we had data very early on
that that you know and some people
legitimately so say well what about the
teachers fine maybe the kids are okay we
had data early on from studies out of
Sweden which a country that did not
close the lower schools their teachers
were at no higher risk than other
professionals they were far below the
risk that they found in I think like
pizza Bakers and bus drivers or taxi
drivers um so there was no elevated risk
for teachers they found and this is a
real place and it's not you know this
wasn't one little town we're talking
about more than a million children who
are in school there tens of thousands of
teachers and this is what they found
um that evidence was dismissed and
ignored so
and so the the thing with the schools
then to me yeah well you pull their
finger on something there too that's
very much relevant which is well
how much risk justifies intervention and
one good rule of thumb is well you
obviously don't intervene if the risk
that's posed is no greater a risk than
risk that people will voluntarily
undertake voluntarily undertake in many
activities that are necessary to their
daily life that are already factored in
and I would say Paramount above those
among those would be driving because
there really isn't anything we ever do
that's more dangerous than driving I
mean it's not that dangerous per unit of
of travel but it's very dangerous it
kills lots of people and so you could
say well if a given Enterprise poses no
more risk than driving then
it can be factored in as acceptable
level of risk and that was certainly the
case with the with the with the covet
death certainly among children and as
you said the Swedish data was there
extraordinarily early on and so then of
course that begs the question again is
like then given that why they held the
school closures and lockdowns because
that was that was a very peculiar
response well and I think that the
driving is an example I think of often
because it's applicable to school
closures it's applicable to this um
Church story which we can talk about in
a moment which is that one of the
arguments that people would make is um
people who oppose what I'm what I'm
saying my viewpoint they would say well
this isn't just about your personal risk
this is about you putting other we have
a societal
um you know we have an obligation to
other people and I I don't disagree
however
in society we balance our own personal
freedoms with risks to others and we
traditionally have a certain high
tolerance for risk we all impose upon
each other and driving is a perfect
example where because there's been a lot
of argument about mass and I've written
a few very very large investigative
pieces about the evidence on masts and
specifically for mandating them in
schools and one of the things people
would say is well it's not just about
your own kid it's about some other kid
but here's the thing if we think about
in America most of the highways have a
speed limit of 55 or 65. we could make
all the highways speed limit at 35 miles
per hour and there would definitely be
fewer accidents fewer serious injuries
and deaths most likely if everyone was
forced to drive slower we know when
you're driving fast that there there's a
greater risk of serious injury or debt
but we choose as a society to allow a
higher speed limit because we value
getting places faster more than whatever
that is that that's just well and that's
partly well we do that partly we should
point out too part of the reason we do
that
is so that people don't die other ways
right because if you're more efficient
while you can make more well so so and
and this this issue of risk is an
interesting one in that regard because
it's no there is no doubt whatsoever
that human beings are dangerous to one
another as potential carriers of
pathogens
but there's also no doubt that we're
extremely valuable to each other as
sources of Cooperative Enterprise and
sources of information and there's a
huge battle biologically between the
risk posed by interpersonal
communication you can think about this
sexually like there's no people without
sex but there's no shortage of sexually
transmitted diseases it's exactly the
same problem and so one way of getting
rid of sexually transmitted diseases is
to forbid sex and that's the end of that
problem but well then there aren't any
people and you know that actually turns
out to be a worse solution than
like a worth pass pathogen so to speak
than than the sexual diseases are
pathogens and so we are always faced you
know it's really interesting eh because
to some degree the evidence suggests
that the difference in political type
it's got twisted up in covid is actually
a difference between
pathogen restriction and information
freedom
so classically before whatever's
happened in the last five years the more
liberal types
were Freedom of Information Advocates
like we should move around we should
speak freely we should transmit
information and we should accept the
risks and conservatives even
temperamentally speaking were the ones
who would say well you have to be
careful when you're freely interacting
because pathogens of various sorts
biological but also ideological can be
transmitted and that's an eternal risk
and the the political landscape is
actually a battle between
walls and doors and the Liberals say
doors and the conservatives say walls
and the truth of the matter is that
walls and doors are both necessary
because things have to be led in and
kept out and there's no way of ever
getting that right so you have to argue
about it forever
but in the covid
overreaction we decided that it was
going to be all walls and so oddly the
Liberals in particular gravitated in
that direction and that is really kind
of a it's a it's a miracle of paradox I
don't understand it yet there's
typically people in the sort of
professional classes and certainly
journalists at least I D you know that's
the the ideal is that they challenge
um these sort of power structures within
Society corporations you know in big
business government the military uh
religion all these institutions yet
during the pandemic by my view there's
this astonishing lack of curiosity
um from journalists and and the broader
public within you know this certain sort
of elite sphere of influencer class or
you know professional class people that
that has blown my mind again
I keep coming back to this thing where
I'm like what is the empirical evidence
for X Y or Z and let me try to find it
but there is this lack of Interest this
lack of curiosity oh well the experts
told me this if you look at
evidence-based medicine they have this
pyramid this hierarchy of which you're
probably familiar with the hierarchy of
of Evan
and in evidence-based medicine expert
opinion is at the bottom that that's
like the last thing you want to look at
it's not irrelevant it's something we
should consider but it's far more
important to have actual observational
evidence than higher from that there's a
randomized controlled trials there are
these mechanisms that we can use through
scientific method to actually get real
evidence that we can look at and try to
ascertain what's going on but what I
found in most of the reporting is that
there was merely Anthony fauci says X or
the the experts say or they'll get in
and oftentimes the expert wasn't even an
expert on this there's you know an
emergency room physician who's quoted
constantly in the New York Times and
other news outlets who had no expertise
in necessarily related to infectious
diseases yet this person was repeatedly
giving her opinion on things it was
unchecked it went unchallenged it was
just printed in in you know in the
newspaper or elsewhere this was this is
how fascinating to me how could this be
happening and these are you know I'm
just an independent journalist these are
places with a machine behind them
enormous you know editorial staffs they
have the resources to send people places
you could get any expert you want if you
write for some of these
um prestigious media Outlets yet they
went to the same crew of people over and
over and they not only did they go the
same people over and over but it was the
same
um lack of challenging these quotes this
idea that an expert's view in and of
itself there's a reason why people get a
second opinion when you go to the doctor
experts disagree on things it's so
interesting that in many ways the same
people who were so vehemently opposed to
Trump's plan let's say to build a wall
between the United States and Mexico
just a few years earlier were absolutely
100 percent gung-ho to build walls
absolutely everywhere throughout Society
in this particular instance you know
it's such a perverse flip now before we
go on to the church issue I have one
remaining question from the Twitter
files I want oh yeah we got's hanging
yeah that's okay but we covered most of
it but you went to San Francisco armed
with a dossier let's say of names and
Twitter accounts that you wanted to look
into
but you also while you were there you
looked into the identities of the people
who were actually doing the censoring
right so there were Twitter accounts but
then there were the Twitter response and
the people responsible for that and so
there were people like Joel Roth whose
name came up repeatedly in the Tybee
investigations and so let's let's just
tie that off and then we'll move move
into the California situation so
what was your sense about the
sophistication and the forethought the
sophistication that characterized and
the forethought that went into the
sensorial activity at Twitter who was
doing that how was it orchestrated was
there in any was it was it professional
and warranted in any manner what what
was your sense of that when you looked
into it right so there were sort of
three different
Avenues as I frame it um about how the
the suppression and censorship took
place and one of them was that they set
up this and I'll get to the people but
I'm going to work backwards to get there
one of them was that there was a system
of bots set up that you know where they
essentially Crawl Through the system and
the Bots were given certain they were
trained they were given certain
information whether it's keywords or
other things to look for and a bot would
flag a certain tweet or a certain
account
um based on it setting off certain
triggers within its you know um whatever
they're teaching the Bots
there are also so that's one Avenue of
how certain tweets were flagged another
one is they had
um independent contractors oftentimes in
places like the Philippines or elsewhere
where you have someone essentially
sitting in a cube Farm
um some person who they were given a
decision tree and I show this in my
reporting it's quite interesting that
you know they they okay this tweet
involves myocarditis you check one thing
then a drop down menu it says this you
know and there's five different options
then you check that and there's this
whole decision Tree on how some random
person and the notion that those systems
never work right the notion that's
something that never works right
some guy sitting in a cube in the
Philippines is going to adjudicate the
validity of a tweet about myocarditis
and whether that works with you know
what are the results say about you know
Elite gadolinium enhancement I mean
there's no way that they're going to be
able to adjudicate this so you have that
happening and then the third thing is
you people themselves at Twitter but all
of it comes but the other two areas the
the the the independent contractor using
a decision tree and the Bots those of
course stem from the people all those
things that initiate with human beings
making choices about what we value or
what we think is or is not acceptable on
our platform now I think most people
would say they don't want to be on a
platform that's just overrun you know
with pornography and and and violence
and crazy stuff I think it's not unreal
and people may disagree with me I think
it's not unreasonable for a platform
like Twitter or others to put very hard
limits on the type of content that's
going to be on the platform because
there's a reason why you know not
everyone goes on 4chan or whatever
because you know there are limits to
what most people want to be exposed let
me make let me make a technical comment
about that because there's been a fair
bit of psychological research done on
this well so
psychologists have started to look into
um like you could call it troll Behavior
I called it troll demon Behavior because
the people who are on social media
platforms aren't exactly humans they're
human machine hybrids right as soon as
we're interacting with a huge social
network we have a reach that far extends
our biological reach so we're machine
human hybrids on social media and those
machine human hybrids are very bizarre
creatures we don't know what to make of
them but we do know something about the
human beings behind the more
trouble making posters
so psychologists have identified a
constellation of traits
manipulative manipulativeness
machiavellianism narcissism
and that's the sort of desire for
attention without Merit
psychopathy that's predatory parasitism
and
sadism which is added relatively
recently which is positive Delight in
the unnecessary suffering of others and
those four characteristics make a set
you could say called the dark tetrad and
it would be associated with anti-social
Behavior criminal Behavior exploitation
of others including on the sexual front
not least on the sexual front now
people who are characterized by that
constellation make up about three
percent of the population stably across
cultures in time and that's because
there's a niche for predatory parasites
like a permanent biological niche now
the problem is is so they're three
percent it's not everyone it's a tiny
minority and they don't tend to be very
successful although they're not entirely
unsuccessful
right so they they propagate
the problem is is that any social
Enterprise of any sort can be and often
will be destabilized by the dark tetrad
types despite their minority status and
so then when we set up a communicative
system like Twitter which is basically a
Cooperative system the parasites the
predatory parasites can invade it and
demolish it and they can do the same
thing to
the whole societies you know the the
number of people who organized the
Russian Revolution after the czarist
period was infinitesimally small
a tiny minority of people can cause a
tremendous amount of trouble I talked to
Andy no for example about uh antifa you
know which is not exactly an
organization it's more like a loose
quasi-terrorist cell
um
phenomena there's no centralized
bureaucracy there's no full-time
employees and so it's easy even to
dismiss its existence and I had talked
to a lot of Democrats who had done
exactly that so I asked Andy at one
point how many antifa
um organizations he thought were extant
in the United States and he said about
40 and I said well how many full-time
equivalent employees so to speak do they
have and he thought well maybe 20 each
it's 800 people it's one in four hundred
thousand
that's all so in the city of a million
people you're going to have like two
people like that but the tariffs so
that's like no people right it's like
well they don't exist two in a million
who cares ah there's the rub
two people in a million who are
hell-bent on causing nothing but trouble
partly because they like trouble partly
because they like hurting people they
can cause an awful lot of trouble and
societies forever have wrestled with the
problem of the Free Riders or the
predatory parasites and so and then that
brings up the terrible spectrum of
censorship like you said well nobody
wants to go on Twitter if it's
completely un on you know overrun by
child porn Distributing hyper violent
predators and fair enough so that has to
be controlled but then the line of
control becomes extraordinarily
difficult to establish right and so and
that's a universal human problem of
regulation of social environments not
just a problem that's emerged in social
media we don't know how to regulate that
in social media so you know in normal
life if you meet someone like that there
are control mechanisms they tend to get
beat up for example they tend to get
suppressed physically but online
zero there's zero
there's almost zero ways of controlling
and so right yeah anyways that's a
little bit of a detour but you get no I
I I do and and the thing is
not
people have asked me I don't have the
answer about where the line should be
drawn
um I don't think there's no line I I you
know as we were discussing I think there
should be some parameters what does my
job as I saw it as a journalist going to
Twitter was I simply want to expose to
the public what happened there can be a
broader conversation about where lines
should or shouldn't be drawn but my
that's not my job my job is sunlight let
me just explain to people what happened
they may not be aware and so so and the
people you mentioned Joel Roth and
others I have to say
reading through lots of these internal
slack Channel Communications and emails
a lot of the people at Twitter really
were trying their best to do
um do what they felt was right these
were not by and large people who were
you know seeking harm on others
um sometimes they went overboard
um for sure and I think there was there
seemed to be I can't prove it because
it's impossible to do a fully systematic
review of everything on Twitter but
there certainly was to my mind and an
overly heavy hand on suppressing
important information and that heavy
hand always seemed to go in One
Direction you could say nothing was too
extreme as far as locking down that's
fine but if you have a prominent
scientist from Harvard who says you know
maybe we shouldn't require the vaccine
on kids that was you know unacceptable
there was a person who's um she's just a
regular citizen who had quoted some um
statistics from the CDC that were
unfavorable you know as far as An
Inconvenient narrative that tweet got
labeled as misleading this was data from
this CDC itself so it was very clear
that now some people could argue do you
do you think dude here's a one of the
things I noticed in Toronto which really
scared me
was that when the um and I should have
known that this was the case
things I knew but it's still
unsettled
makes the terrible things that happened
and
during the lockdown there was an
opportunity for people to inform on
their neighbors
and I certainly saw people in my
neighborhood take extraordinarily
positive Delight in that you know when
you remember in places like East Germany
under the Soviets a third of the people
were government informers and I think
there was a poll I don't exactly
understand it but there was a poll to
that desire for authoritarian control
especially if you could wield it
yourself that added a degree of
attractiveness because your your mystery
as you said like oh there were lots of
people at Twitter they were trying to do
their best but when push came to shove
all the controls seemed to be
seeded to the players who wanted control
like they couldn't go too far but
everyone else could go too far and so
that begs the question it's like even
though those people were trying hard to
do the right thing when they aired they
aired on the side of the authoritarian
so to speak and so that's a real mystery
that that's the fascinating point to me
is that they aired on the side of the
government and aired on the side of the
the public health establishment and
there are plenty of people would say
well that's reasonable in a time of of
chaos and you know lots of information
but I mean if you just take a little bit
of a step back not even a full step but
just a half step back again these are
the things that liberals traditionally
are incredibly incred they have their
antennae up they're very worried about
yet all of a sudden I think that the the
head of of New Zealand at one point she
had said we are the truth or something
about a fact you know absolutely right I
mean this is these are astonishing
statements we that we of course don't
want quote misinformation to to get out
there with people and there are plenty
of people with crazy Q Anon crazy stuff
that Bill Gates is putting a microchip
in you with the fine but I saw no
evidence that that was overrun this this
sort of Boogeyman this idea of some
maybe it's part of the three percent
you're talking about or some other
people who are prone to believing
certain conspiratorial things or what
have you or things that are outlandish
that did not drive all this that was
Amplified by the media saying that this
was the most dangerous thing but we have
to have some degree of trust in people
to be able to be given information and
it's to me it was incredibly dangerous
when
regular citizens but especially fully
accredited scientists people with
medical degrees were nevertheless had
their what they had to say suppressed in
some manner either specifically on a
place like Twitter or on a more
um indirect sense by not being given a
voice in a lot of media Outlets where it
was always the kind of establishment
people whether within the government or
those who wanted to be in the government
many of them what you could observe
Jordan was there are certain people who
on Twitter and elsewhere very early on
were saying lots of things that some
people suspect they knew weren't quite
true but they were supportive of what
the administration Administration liked
and lo and behold they ended up getting
jobs in the administration
um later on that there's a and what and
what's going to happen to them when they
leave the administration maybe they'll
go on the board of Pfizer who knows but
they're so you could observe that these
things going on where there's this
establishment of people saying something
it doesn't mean the establishment's
wrong automatically we should have
enough confidence in the veracity of
what some experts are telling us they
should have that they are not
intimidated by other experts and
credential people or regular people
saying something different if something
like a microchip is being inserted into
me through a you know a syringe that's
so outlandish that they should not be um
frightened by this that like let people
say crazy stuff
that's exactly right because every once
in a while some of that crazy is
true yeah and that's some of the things
man so and and that's the thing and you
have to my mind you have to there should
be a line drawn somewhere but you have
to err on the side of of more leniency
more latitude for voices not fewer
voices especially if you're liberal
especially if you're liberal right
that's what happened on a platform like
Twitter that they weren't trying to like
Crush everyone these were people who for
a whole number of complex reasons said
we're gonna go with whatever the CDC
says that's the truth and if someone
says something against what the CDC says
then that might be labeled as misleading
in fact we might even
um we might even suspend that account
but again getting even though Twitter is
a global platform it gets back to that
american-centric idea there are many
things from pediatric vaccine policies
to school closures to a whole host of
other things that other countries were
doing very differently from the United
States but yet is that misinformation if
the is the head of some you know
um Health Department in some country in
western Europe are they automatically
[Music]
um
I didn't say Sweden but yes Sweden I
mean people don't realize Iceland as
well those are different cultures I get
it it doesn't mean everything's exactly
the same in my book that I'm doing I did
an intensive analysis I worked with an
epidemiologist on this where we looked
at when you go City by City you look at
all the idea that this place was so
foreign and so different is such an
absurdity again because this was done
without real evidence all this was based
on assumptions assumptions built upon
assumptions built upon assumptions
that's how modeling works and you to to
this sort of like there's this
epistemological confusion where we were
valuing assumptions over empirical
evidence well people it's hard for
people see the thing about models is
that it's easy for Lay people and for
scientists because most scientists
really aren't scientists you know
um it's very easy for them to confuse
model with data like model is hypothesis
and your point with models is
extraordinarily well taken it's not only
are models hypotheses they're
multi-layered hypotheses
call them a study and I'm like that's
not a study but the all the time
conflate the terms and the average
reader has no clue what the doubt well
and if the more hierarchy if the model
is generated by you know an extremely
powerful computer it's even more it's
even easier to succumb to the Temptation
that the model is actually data it's
like no the model is a hypothesis a
multi-layer hypothesis with many
assumptions and that is a hard thing for
people to grasp methodologically and so
you see that also with the climate
models the same problem obtains
I I view that as almost this sort of
techno solutionism they they call as
this term where it's this idea oh well
the more high-tech of our solution the
more accurate it must be but that's not
the case that that's a fallacy to to
view everything in that manner so but
the technology could be a super computer
or it could be you know using the word
technology a little more broadly it
could be this idea of these
interventions a mask is a technology
um so these so the idea of doing
something is very much comes I think
from a good place and a lot of people
particularly people in public health or
the medical field that there's a whole
bunch of the opinion of literature about
this about people the The Urge the
instinct to do something but you know in
emergency rooms they have an expression
it says don't just do something stand
there
sometimes
more
wise to not always intervene but there's
just this Instinct that's so powerful
yeah well it's dangerous to worship that
technocratic solution you know that old
story of the Tower of Babel is exactly
that right it's a cardinal threat to
erect a technological edifice and then
assume that that can reach to Heaven
that's a big mistake everyone ends up
unable to talk to each other
most interventions don't work that's the
story of most medications most things
are not beneficial or if they work
they're not a net gain it's quite it is
quite hard to get something approved or
it should be typically because most
things don't meet that bar yet the
evidentiary basis for these things was
was not no one held it up to that
standard for a lot of these
interventions that we did and as I
mentioned before and then I don't know
if we have time for the church thing but
it all wraps together that well let's
try that let's go there now let's go to
the church for example because it
concretizes it that's right the people
in charge who are making these decisions
like everyone see the world through
their own lens they are not
um no one is this omniscient you know
being who understands the Kaleidoscope
of society so I understand that they are
individuals but they have their own
biases as we all do and so what happened
in California again echoing what
happened with kids with schools was
churches in this particular County this
is in Santa Clara County that's the the
real the heart of Silicon Valley and
these people were not allowed to attend
church and I could under it seems to me
Others May disagree perfectly reasonable
in in Spring of 2020 we're not sure
what's happening information's still
coming in there's a bit of chaos going
on but very quickly after that things
began opening remember some significant
portion of society was always out and
about working because guess what people
still needed food delivered to their
door the slaughterhouses were open
people were still working the cashiers
at various places
Etc so it's not that societies no one
pulled a switch where everything was
shut things were still happening and
once that happens what we know from from
implementation science what we know is
that people's ability to comply with
with interventions wanes over time
particularly things that are very
uncomfortable like wearing a mask or not
being able to see friends and relatives
and I'm not religious at all I don't go
to church but I recognized that these
people when I interviewed them they
needed that and the church wasn't closed
for a couple weeks it wasn't even close
we're talking about for seven months
people were not allowed to gather
indoors and do this thing that they did
and again this is something that I don't
do myself I have no personal skin in the
game but I reckon I get emotional
thinking about it these are people who
suffer from addiction these were people
who were profoundly lonely you might
have some 70 year old person who lives
alone and they were told you are not
allowed to get out of your apartment
you're not allowed to see anybody and
maybe this person went to church every
week for the past 20 years that's gone
that's over you're not allowed to go
there and have this experience that
meaningful to you and there were people
who wanted to commit suicide because the
profound sadness and loneliness
everyone's different some people may
tolerate the idea of being home and
watching Netflix that may be totally
fine for them and the laptop class were
able to continue to make a good living
while they could work from home in their
computer that may have been fine and for
many kids that may have been fine but
for some people it wasn't fine and these
people that but yet at the same time
while the church while these people were
unable to go there guess what the malls
were open
museums were open they were open at
varying capacities depending which time
but it was always more than the capacity
they allowed at the church what a
profound statement that was on the
values of the people who were pulling
the levers of society and again so it's
not like they can't even pretend that
this was all about well we need to
mitigate the spread of the virus well if
you were really that concerned about it
then why were the casinos open why was
someone able to go to a liquor store
where you're going to have people
circulating in and out all day long
that's that's not a low impact
environment either
um so you have all these things where
they were picking and choosing what
things could be open and what things
couldn't be open and to me I recognize
that for some of these people they
needed this badly so much so that they
were attempting commit suicide some of
these people others fell back into
addiction and it's not a place that I
would go but but the idea that the to
not have the empathy and the
understanding that we are a vast Society
where we all have different needs and we
all have different interests and things
we like and even though that's not my
need or my interest I recognize the
profound importance that that place and
that experience has for some people and
maybe some 70 year old lady said you
know what I don't want to get coveted I
don't want to die but I'm willing to
take that risk of an additional exposure
to go to church because this is what's
meaningful to me and I think it's it's a
you know and I don't know where the line
gets drawn but the idea that people
could go to a museum but not go to
church inside and meet with people to me
seems wrong and I think some what I hope
it's wrong it's got to be wrong look if
if both epidemiologically and ethically
well if if people have the right to do
anything
they should have the right to do what
they regard as most fundamental and you
know you said you came at this problem
from the perspective of an atheist but
an atheist who's observing this
phenomenon who's thinking coherently
would think well
these people are attempting to re to
establish and maintain contact with what
they believe to be most fundamental it
might be their Community it might be
their beliefs and there's there's there
has to be extraordinary extraordinary
evidence before that can be forgotten
and maybe it should never be forgotten
you I think you could make that case
quite strongly because it's also the
case that
historically the churches have been
veritable epicenters of positive
response to epidemic realities for
example and so you closed them down not
only at the Peril of the people who
attend the churches but you close them
down at broader social Peril and so it's
interesting that that even though as you
said you don't practice religious
practice yourself at least not Church
going that this is something that really
deeply struck you it instantly because
I've been writing about kids and I have
I try not to get into what they would
call like a victim porn but these
stories that I've been told by Educators
and by parents about children when you
have autistic kids who were denied
treatment and Care from professionals
that they counted on and their families
didn't have any money or support system
to know how to handle them the child
abuse claims that went up kids being
beaten with a wire at home and the
reports coming in because they rely on
teachers and going to school as this as
that's a main mechanism for reporting
where teachers spot this the schools
serve an enormously important role in
people's lives far beyond merely the
education you know from books and
similarly while it does not a place I
attend church fulfills that role for
many people as well and the idea that
these people were denied something that
was critical for their well-being
because that's Health too not wanting to
kill yourself that's Health that matters
and they're also without getting into
the weeds there was no evidence that
this intervention had any benefit
whatsoever again two weeks something
like that if we pull the lever that may
work but what we see is over time people
aren't complying with staying home we
can see that with the Google travel data
when they can look at the data of people
moving around people were out and about
regardless schools that were in a hybrid
model or the towns that were schools
were closed they had no fewer cases than
places or no more cases it's it's all
over the map the data it's the society
is complicated and as you said you know
quite a while ago this idea of taking
something incredibly vast and complex
and Distilling it down into this simple
thing do this and you are a virtuous
person and if you don't do that you're a
piece of garbage for me to even question
any of this stuff I was a lunatic all of
a sudden I'm some right wing crazy
person because I'm looking at data and
pointing something out and saying wait a
minute kids are back to school and this
in such and such country why aren't they
here I'm I'm talking to people all of a
sudden I am the villain and the past
well you're actually technically you're
the pathogen
you're the pathogen that the behavioral
immune system is now responding to and
that's extraordinarily dangerous If you
eliminate pathogens well you know people
often say well you vilify someone
because you're afraid of them it's like
no you don't you vilify someone because
you identify them as a pathogen and then
you're motivated not to avoid them which
is what you do if you're afraid but to
eradicate them because that's what you
do with pathogens you know I read
Hitler's table talk for example which
was a collection of his spontaneous
speeches at dinner times collected over
four years and all the language he used
to describe the Jews was pathogen
language pure blood of the Aryans the
parasitical nature of the of the Jewish
Interlopers the disease-spreading
capacity of the ghettos it was 100
percent Public Health pathogen language
and it's way more toxic than mere fear
because people say well Hitler was
afraid of the Jews it's like no he
wasn't it was discussed contempt and
pathogen language and that's way worse
because you burn out sources of
infection that's
there's no right what you don't offer
sympathy to a pathogen right and there's
the the level of disgust and control
with you know with we it reached a point
where the County Health Department hired
special officers who spied on church
members they surveilled them I mean I I
wrote it into my mind it almost was like
this dark comedy they were peering at
them through a chain-link fence
um on an adjacent property watching
church members they then once they got a
um uh there was an order from the court
that eventually allowed the the officers
to enter the church so they were
monitoring these very intimate personal
events they went in there was the thing
called Mana for moms I remember was one
of the events that the church should
this is like a really personal thing
that the moms were doing together here
come the Health Inspectors to watch us
doing this and you read and I wrote this
in my article on my substance where you
can read about you know there were eight
women present in the room two of them
embraced one woman was not wearing a
mask I mean just this like list it was
crazy making and then the to me me and
then the ultimate thing was they also
monitored their cellular phone data that
they could see that there was a very
sophisticated analysis done by the
Stanford Professor that they included in
that I found in the court documents
where you could see they drew a geofence
around the church it's this like digital
border and you could see
um they could monitor how many people
were entering and and leaving the
property and even on a granular level
different buildings within the property
they could see how long people were
within each spot this was happening in
America
like in the present tense monitoring
people that is something that has gone
so far beyond anything that I think any
regular person would think is reasonable
and what I would hope is that we have
some sort of
legislative mechanisms I guess put in
place to try to put some sort of breaks
on something like this happening again
whether it's for a pandemic or some
other because there's always an
emergency whether there's some other
thing that's going to happen there needs
to be some process in place that was
completely absent during the pandemic in
My View From preventing this type of
behavior is this the same church that
has been fined so in millions of dollars
that's right so I wrote about the whole
case because I had access to the to the
court files and it's all in there and I
do a lot of screenshots from the things
they said you know that are in that are
part of the discovery and part of the
court documents but millions of dollars
to find this I have all the details
where it was something like up to five
thousand dollars a day and it just kept
accruing I mean this was like this would
make a loan shark blush if they saw the
fines that were levied against the
church and look the church was was you
know thumbing their nose at the
authorities and boy did they not like it
and I understand again in the beginning
how people may have said hey we need to
keep everything closed but once it was a
few weeks and then a month and then two
months and then three months the months
just kept rolling by while remember you
could go to a liquor store you could go
to a museum you could go to the mall you
could go to a casino all these other go
to a black lives matter March that
that's right exactly so they were are
picking and choosing which elements of
people's lives were worthy of doing and
which ones weren't and a lot of these
decisions not only is that an ethical
choice that they were making for regular
citizens but it was not grounded in any
sort of real epidemiological
um evidence to do these things there was
no evidence in the end that people at
this church had an elevated rate of
cases than anyone else in society
because with a high as you know from
talking with Jay about Atari a highly
contagious respiratory virus you're not
going to stop this thing you might have
there might be an effect early on for a
very transient period of time with
everything is closed but you Society
will grind to a halt if that happens so
over time the the benefit of any of
these interventions just goes down like
that because the longer time goes on the
more people need to circulate and mix
with society and you know who needs to
most who has to the people who are
forced to the plumber the cashier the
orderly in the hospital while someone
else can sit home on their laptop in
their home maybe their children have a
beautiful room where they can learn you
know do remote learning maybe they hired
some extra Tutors or started a pod
program that was fine for them and then
that was virtuous as well it's very very
convenient it's nice that not only is
the not only is this comfortable for us
I am also a more virtuous person you you
dirty person you want to go to church
that's bad you're a bad person so this
wildly overly simplified binary of good
and bad remarkable because remember with
George Bush back in the day you're
either with us or against us and and
liberals mocked him what a absurdly
simplistic view of society but to my
mind there was very much that same type
of dynamic that same lens of this you
know bifurcated lens was the same view
on a lot of the pandemic response it
doesn't mean we should have done nothing
at all it doesn't mean that we should um
should not care about how we may infect
other people all of those things things
are important what it does mean is the
the way that this was handled the way
that it was done both with the mechanics
of the different interventions but also
with the ethical the highly subjective
ethical choices that were made about
what people could and could not do were
profoundly inequitable and the irony is
that this is something that progressives
profess to care about the most is quote
Equity these sort of you know equality
of outcome or even equality of
opportunity yet the children who were
harmed the most were the ones who were
who who depend on school most the rich
kids they suffer too and plenty of them
you know I don't want to dismiss it for
kids who are that more well off
financially or whatever because
everyone's different has their own
experience but the kids who really
suffered were the ones who didn't have
all of these resources similar to some
guy who I spoke with in California the
person who really suffered as someone
who suffers from addiction relied on the
church for it for him that was his
support system and that was denied from
in so you have all these people who were
denied these support systems that they
required that they needed to flourish as
people and there was no evidence that
this Denial in the end in the end had
any benefit for society
that's a good place to end but I want to
ask you one more question anyways
um
you've been looking into this
pattern of hyper unidimensional virtue
signaling hyper response for a number of
years and you know you said early on
that alienated you to some degree
from the organizations and maybe even
the class of people that you have been
easily as profitably and and positively
associating with before what's changed
for you personally and politically as a
consequence of having waded through this
like how do you view the different world
differently now psychologically but also
politically and socially then then let's
say six seven years ago
profound profound change and I'll tell
you the one
one positive part about this I've
chatted about this with a few friends
who've been similar to me these sort of
like you know politically homeless so to
speak people is that I never thought
that at my age I'm 48 I never thought
that I would have an experience in my
life that would you know completely
alter
how I view the world how I view myself
that would flip me off you know this
axis that I was on you know I had those
experiences as a teenager in my early
20s when I'm reading the beat poets I'm
doing these things my mind was getting
blown on a regular basis I'm being
turned on to all these different ideas
I'm reading Marshall mcclew and oh my
God the medium is the message all these
things were blowing my mind but as I got
older which I think is typical that
stopped happening there were things that
still interested me that I still was
pursuing but the idea of like my whole
frame of reference being changed that
that was no longer happening and it's
the one upside is that's both unsettling
but also kind of amazing that that
happened to me as like a middle-aged
adult and I had always seen myself and
my tribe as if not more virtuous than
certainly at least
um maybe more intelligent more wise more
reasonable
and what I observed has completely
changed how I view people in different
political tribes I have I still think
plenty of people on the right are
completely insane and foolish and I
still think people on the far left are
completely foolish and insane in many
circumstances but I no longer have this
dismissive
um view of people particularly on the
right that I used to have
um and I don't even view myself I you
know I hate even using these terms left
and right because like most people have
a complex range of feelings and opinions
on a complex range of topics so I don't
I don't sit myself in one you know camp
or another but the I've always felt a
little bit
um alienated as a person just
psychologically and and this experience
has
made that sense of alienation
profound in a way but in a way that's
also
um
that livens me in a way as well because
I wow to learn something new when you're
old or getting older it's quite
remarkable so as as destabilizing as
this has been it's also energizing and
and you know so so that's why this topic
has been so interesting to me because
now things see I see them differently
and I can see I used to find it absurd
you know when people the elitist
Democrats and I'm like oh be quiet
whatever now I it's so obvious the
smugness that I can see in the way some
people speak and the dismissiveness so
it took this event to sort of pull the
the cloth back on on on on on certain
things that I wasn't able to see before
um some of my views are the same as they
always were
um and some of them have changed but
rather than political views changing I
don't even know what terminology to use
but more of my sort of social or
societal view has changed different from
maybe my core political beliefs but just
there's a degree of equanimity that I
think I think
people need to embody that I still need
to as well but that I've that I've been
able to to turn the dial up on that
wasn't there before
um so that I don't know if that answers
your question but it's the thing that's
it's just been like a bizarre and
remarkable experience
the one nice thing is there's there is
this I don't know how I was going to use
the word small and it is small I don't
know how large or how small it is it's a
minority but there is a group of people
who I found who are kind of like me now
maybe maybe they were always liberals or
progressives and then they found
themselves sort of adrift maybe they
were always a conservative but these
people who I've connected with the
amount of doctors who out of the blue
out get an email this is early on in the
pandemic and like you know spring 2020
and the email would always start with
um I didn't vote for Trump but dot dot
dot and and these conversations would
always start that way where everyone has
to sort of apologize you have to kind of
clear your throat first and say and but
all these people who felt homeless who
felt afraid to say something out loud or
even confused and and other people who I
met in my in my small town where I live
there was always this this
um sense of while I lost other people
and some friends who I think I lost and
people who think I've gone crazy
um I've made other friends along the way
of people who also felt unmoored who
also said hey wait a minute some of this
stuff doesn't seem quite right
um so that's been a wonderful thing as
well that you know to use some sort of
cliche when uh whatever the door closes
the window opens whatever it may be
something some things closed down but
maybe there's some sort of equilibrium
that happens that something else then
then opens in a way so
um all right well that's that's a good
place to end I would say uh there was
lots of other things that
we could talk about I wanted to talk
about but we covered a lot of material I
and maybe we can get a chance to do that
at some point in the future we didn't
cover gain of function research for
example which I would have loved to have
delved into but that might be that might
be a topic for an entirely separate
conversation yeah yeah
exactly but thank you very much for
agreeing to talk to me today and as
great work that you've done on this
front which you know you were an early
Canary in the coal mine so to speak and
you know that's not an easy thing to do
even though it's an exciting thing to do
and maybe too exciting you know as
you've said it to you you're obviously a
Chase in point that an old dog can learn
new tricks and maybe then not be such an
old dog for a while again too you know
because that's kind of an interesting
consequence and so to everybody who's
watching and listening thank you very
much as I say frequently your time and
attention isn't presumed or uh taken for
granted I'm very happy that people are
tuning into this podcast and watching
and listening these complicated
conversations and to the Daily wire plus
people thank you for facilitating the
recording on both ends which you do I'm
in uh Portugal today in Lisbon and we
have a nice Studio set up here to make
this possible and that's not an easy
thing to arrange at a moment's notice
and and David thank you very much for
agreeing to talk to me today uh it's
much appreciated
yeah this is terrific thanks Jordan all
right so just so everybody remembers I'm
going to talk to David for another uh
half an hour behind the daily wire plus
platform firewall we'll talk a little
bit about the development of his
journalistic interests across time and
maybe delve into some of the other
things that we didn't have quite enough
time to touch on in this conversation if
you're inclined to participate in that
and you'd like to support the daily wire
plus Endeavor find what they're doing
worthwhile
um
certainly been useful for me and uh and
fun to work with which is quite
interesting and so you know join us over
there and other than that ciao will join
you all again on another podcast in the
very near future thanks David